Well, I want to tell you what a great pleasure it is for me to be talking with you.
Thank you very much.
It's a great honor.
And I guess this is a watershed book in your development as a writer, and I wonder if you could tell me a little bit about that.
Is it in fact a watershed book in your development?
What did you say?
About this novel?
Yes.
This is my first novel.
and I began to write when I was a student, twenty-three years old, student of Tokyo University.
Then the next year, when I was twenty-three years old, I wrote this first novel.
Then this is my first work, and also this is
This is what I wanted to write when I began to write.
When I was a student, I hoped to write two things.
One thing is our students in the Tokyo city, how we students of Tokyo are living or feeling or thinking.
Then the first theme was what I was
feeling when I was child, between the war, in a small town, small, very, very small village, surrounded, very thick, dense forest.
Thick.
Yeah.
In Shikoku Island.
The Shikoku Island is one of the, I believe, the smallest
four islands of Japanese archipelago.
I'm sorry, what was that word?
Four?
In Japan, the Japanese archipelago.
Okay, yes, I'm sorry.
Yes, I understand.
Yes, then the smallest one is Shikoku, and in the middle of Shikoku, in the forest district, my village was.
So, how we
children experienced in that small village during the war.
That was my theme.
I wanted to write.
So shortly after I began to write my short stories, I wanted to write this novel, NIP,
The title has changed in English a couple of times, I guess, the translation of it.
Yes, you're right.
This title was, at first, Nip the Bad, Gun the Kid.
But Marion Boyer said that the gun is too strong, so she want to take a shoot.
So Marion suggested the change of the title.
Yes, yes.
That's cute.
That is so.
But I'm interested in how this really was so influential in your development, in the thematic development of your work.
Yes.
And it has been said that this is a watershed work in your development.
And of course it was written before the birth of your son, which also changed your life as well.
Yes.
And maybe you can address yourself to both of those questions.
Yes, that's a very accurate question.
In the beginning, I hoped to, I wanted to write how I was in the war time.
Because I believe I was born and I lived until the end of the war.
So to me, my boyhood during the war is the most important thing.
in the first half of my life.
So I was, during the war, I was born in 1935, and the war began in 1941, and it ended in 1945.
And I became a pupil of the school when the war began.
And during the four years, five years, I was very strong, under the very strong education of Japanese imperialist creed.
So I wanted, I believed that my, our emperor is a god, I must die for the god emperor and
This is only one hope of my boyhood.
And also I'm very deeply afraid that I must die for the God.
And so... You felt this as a child?
Yes, yes, yes.
When I was a child.
So, but even to the child, you know, our teacher always teaches about our...
very aggressive imperialist education, like the Hitlerjugend.
So, I think every morning our teacher asks us, how do you, when you are, if God, emperor asks you to die, then we must die, answer aloud,
Yes, I died.
I cut off my belly and I died.
I cut off my what?
My belly, yeah.
Belly, right?
Belly, okay.
Then sometimes I was delayed, delayed to answer.
What was that word again?
When our teacher asked us, how do you do it when God asks you to die?
I hesitate to answer.
A little time.
Then, always I was strongly beaten by the teacher.
Why I hated to take this, I couldn't believe the great emperor believes in me, knows me, this child in a small village of Shikoku.
Mr. Gold Emperor can know my name or my existence in this place.
So I couldn't answer so rapidly.
But anyway, that was our education.
Then the war ended and a new constitution was made.
This is a constitution of American democracy.
And we found out a very new perspective about my life.
So I went to Tokyo and I studied, I began to study the literature of France, French literature.
But anyway, before the end of the war, the war time, my boyhood was the most important thing.
Do you mind if I shoot a couple while you talk?
Yes, so I created this Nobel and also
I wrote this novel from the side of children who came to our village, not the side of the villagers.
So I always felt I am isolated in this village when I was a little boy, so I wanted to write from the side of
children who came to my village.
That is what I wanted to write.
That's OK.
I'm listening, sir.
You can keep talking.
Yes.
But then, in terms of how this, again, changed the focus of the themes that you would develop as a writer.
Oh, yes.
Yes, then, after this novel,
I continued to write my life and inner life of Japanese students in Tokyo city.
So I continued to write many short stories and some novels about how we are living after the war and during the occupation and after occupation.
That was my thing.
Then I think I was, when I was 28 years old, my son was born with difficulty.
So I began to write about my son and my life.
So I think I began my writing very early when I was 22 years old.
And I believe when I was 23 years old,
I accomplished my first groups through this nipida.
And then, after that, I was in the crisis of young writers who cannot continue the... This is after this book?
Ah, yes.
Yes.
And this is after the birth of your son?
Then... Or prior to the birth of your son?
Yeah, yeah.
I met the birth of my son.
Then I am very deeply troubled and I...
I have forgotten about my novels, so I must fight against it.
Were you driven, obsessed with writing?
Were you driven to express yourself in a literary way?
I'm wondering about the motivation to write.
Was it an obsession with you, I wonder?
In the beginning?
Oh, yes.
I think I am, I felt in my situation, young boy, children who was born in a small village and who lived.
Generations.
Yeah.
My generation is, I hope to write in the name of my generation and also during, among my generation,
I felt I am rather strange because later I am studying French literature and so I wanted to write.
That was the motive at first.
And second motive is I want to understand my situation with my
You mean your situation personally, or your situation as a person living in this time?
Yes, yes, yes.
Both.
I mean, existentially your situation, or personally?
Yes, yes.
You are right.
At first I wanted to write my personal, very personal situation with my son, and through writing my situation, very personal situation, I wanted to express something about the very large,
I'm just trying to, for the sake of the tape, so I'll know the word.
Okay, go ahead.
I'm sorry to interrupt.
Then, on that time I was studying and researching the Hiroshima problem.
So, I think within myself, the Hiroshima problem, that is a very social problem.
It's a spiritual problem too, isn't it?
Yes, yes, yes.
Coming to terms with this is more than just a social problem and a medical problem.
Yes, yes.
I have to believe it's a spiritual problem as well.
And I think that reflects itself in writing too.
I agree with you completely.
Then I wanted to write about my personal problem and to reach our spiritual problem.
That is motivation of my next...
stage in the private matter.
Then I continued to write about my son and also I developed my literature to write about my village more socially, more historically, more mystical.
I wanted to write the myth
Miss of Japanese.
Oh, okay, okay.
Yeah, okay.
Okay, I understand.
Of our village and our district.
So, and then also now I'm now organizing everything, very personal matter, with my son and also my village and my society and my Japan.
That is my literature.
I understand, from what I've read, is that with the awarding of the Nobel Prize, you basically now feel that your work as a novelist is complete.
Am I correct in that?
You're correct.
But that is not because I got the prize.
I understand that.
But because I...
I'm now six years old.
You're a young man.
No, no, no.
I'm 52.
You're a young man.
So I wanted to create my conclusion for my literature, or my life, or my age, my generation.
So I continued to write my novels for a long time, so I think, and also I almost
accomplished the story of my son, my miss, my village, my background of the age, everything.
So, especially I have published the trilogy.
The trilogy?
Yeah.
Very, very.
I'm just saying that for my benefit when I come to
transcribe the tape so I'll know what the word is.
Oh, yes.
I'm sorry, I don't mean to interrupt.
That's good.
So, trilogy.
So, my trilogy title is Flaming Green Tree, Flaming.
And just Flaming Green Tree, I am, I believe I have written all of the themes or programs of my
concern to my village or to my town or to my country as a novelist.
So I think I finished my writing of my novels for at least for five years.
Then I began studying about important things to me.
I must read some philosophers and I must read some
novelist again so I want I want to think deep then I want to understand what is the true meaning of my life in my generation and in my place and what is the meaning of my long life to write to write only novels so
I began my last age of study.
So you are now entering a period of study?
Yes.
And you say that there are many books that you wish to read.
Can you tell me some of them?
Are they largely Japanese books?
No, no.
Very, very simply speaking, at first two years or three years, I must read Spinoza.
your country.
You know, as a writer, I am writing novels, and also I am a student of French literature, and I read modern French literature, but also I continued to read François
the writer of the Renaissance, French Renaissance, and other figures such as Erasmus, Calvin, Sebastian Castellion, or Henri IV.
The great philosophers.
Yes, Sebastian Castellion.
Those are very important to me.
For 30 years, I continued to read the French Renaissance.
Now, I hope to read post-Renaissance.
Post-Renaissance.
Yes.
Nowadays, we say that post-modernism, post-modern, so I was called a writer of post-modern.
You were called a post-modernist in Japan.
Yes, in Japan.
I hope to create another, myself, not postmodern, but postmodernism.
At some point, after these several years of study which you contemplate, do you expect to enter a new phase of your writing?
Yes, that is what I want to say.
That is not through the form of novels.
Not by the form of the novel.
In other words, you won't be writing fiction, so to speak.
Yeah, I'm writing fiction as a novel, so I have a narrative of novelist, narrative of fiction, narrative of novel, but I want to create another narrative.
Another narrative?
Yes.
I don't know what I can do, but anyway, I continued to write novel for a long time, so I feel doomed.
I haven't anything to write in the form of novel anymore.
But I have something to speak.
I think so, and I think that with this
visibility that you now have as a Nobel laureate, and certainly millions of people now are more aware of your work than ever before.
That does kind of place a responsibility on you, doesn't it?
Do you feel a sense of responsibility now that you've won the Nobel laureate?
No, I don't think I haven't, I don't feel responsibility because I am, I, oh,
I don't think I am so great who have the responsibility, but first I must do for myself, you know.
I'm doomed as a novelist.
You're doomed?
Yes, as a novelist.
You are doomed.
Is that the word, doomed?
No, doomed.
I'm in the crisis.
Oh, in the crisis.
Okay, sure.
I finished my trilogy, so I haven't any... Oh yes, I have some images of novels, but I must change my life.
So I think only ten years is... I have not... I have only ten years more, so... You think?
I think.
So, five years study, and after five years I must create new...
style of writing.
There I hope to talk to the children especially.
I hope to write some works which can be read by children and which can be read by old men.
Is this partly a response to your experience with your son?
Oh, yes.
Secondly, I think my son is now composing his music.
That's wonderful.
Thank you very much.
This is extraordinary news.
Yeah.
So, until today, I was thinking about, I must express for my son.
For your son?
Yeah.
But my son can express by himself.
In terms of words.
Yeah.
But he can't express... In terms of...
Music.
But he can express in terms of... Cannot.
He cannot.
Cannot.
But he can in music, though, can't he?
Yes, yes.
And I was thinking, my son cannot express himself by language, like words, so I can express through my words.
But recently, hearing his music, I felt it's my misunderstanding.
My son can understand himself by music.
He can?
He can.
So it's no use, his interpreter.
So I forget, gave up.
I gave up the role of interpreter of my son.
You gave that up.
How do you feel?
What do you feel when you hear his music?
Yes, yes.
At first, there are two CDs.
And when I heard the first CD, I thought, yes, the life is happy, human being is great.
And I'm very deeply shocked from the beauty, very simple beauty, like dew on the grass in the morning.
So I'm very deeply impressed by that.
And then three years passed.
And he created the next CD.
The new music is very dark.
It was dark, you said?
Very dark.
And what do you think he's feeling to create America?
Oh, yeah, dark and like weeping.
His soul is weeping.
His soul is weeping?
Yeah.
And I found out that, yes.
He cannot find out.
his darkness of his sorrow, without music.
But through music, he created the first CD, and every day he could listen, and he found out new images, new content, new... new...
We were thinking about his music, through music, so he could find out the method to express his inner thinking more precisely, more largely, more profoundly.
Then he found out the sadness, the grief.
So that is very shocking to me.
Through writing the music, he conquered his grief.
This must be very inspirational for you, very inspiring.
Yes, yes.
It's the same for me.
So, yes, my son can create music, so I must do something for my spirit or my soul.
That is my...
thinking now.
You certainly, throughout your body of writing, there has been a great respect and a reliance on the power of mythology.
Yes.
And I wonder if in these times through which we've lived, particularly the war and the use of atomic weapons in Japan, do you see the evolution of a new mythology, a modern mythology at all, in your work and also in the literature that follows?
Yes, just precisely.
I hope to create the myth of this nuclear age.
And also I hope to pray for the possibility of new, the newer myth of after, after nuclear age,
That is precisely what I am thinking to write in the future.
To develop this kind of a... Yes, after my study.
After your study?
Yes.
And of course, if you could just tell me in general what the purpose of mythology is to you, or the meaning of it, how you can express your feelings about the world.
through fiction and mythology as opposed to, say, writing essays or works of non-fiction.
I guess it strikes to you, your vision of the power of literature, I guess.
I hope to create a consolidated style.
Consolidate?
Is that a word?
Consecrate?
No, no.
That is, I hope, to organize.
Organize.
Consolidate.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, yes.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Yes.
That is not poetry, not novel, not essay, not theater, but also I wanted to include everything.
And also especially I want to write for children.
My, you know, the style of novel today, that is
Also, I want to use the word doomed in the dead end.
Our home of Nobel coming to the dead end in this 10th century.
So I must create, we must fight, we must try very, very difficult task to create the possibility
of the Nobel in the end of this century or in the beginning of the 21st century.
But everyone tries very hard, Giotta Glass, Kundera.
Nadine Gordimer.
Nadine Gordimer, yes, and also Vargas Josa, and you are Apdaek, or you are Norman Bela.
and our Korean writers and Chinese writers and myself.
So, but I tried for a long time to create very, very difficult literature, but now, as another style, I wanted to write more freely.
I've read some place where you say that what you have done is to write about the dignity of human beings.
Yes, always I continue to write about it.
Dignity of human beings in the nuclear age.
And so when you're writing fiction, again, there's also the storyteller at work, because a novel doesn't work unless somebody is engaged by the story, right?
There has to be a sense of narrative.
Don't you agree with that?
I mean, we've talked about
writing to send a message, so to speak.
But at the same time, you have to be mindful about the necessity of engaging the reader.
Yes.
And so are you constantly thinking of stories?
I guess this embraces that whole concept of mythology that you were talking about a little while ago.
Yes.
That's a very accurate understanding that I am, I continued to write stories for a long time.
The story, narrative or story.
It's not enough now, to me.
It has to be more.
Oh, yes.
You know, the narrative of the story is always progressing horizontally, and I hope to think about it vertically now.
Think about what, I'm sorry?
Vertically.
Yeah.
That's excellent.
And the direction vertically is...
in terms of content as opposed to stories.
About the spirit.
OK, that's very important.
I guess you're giving a lecture today at Harvard, is that right?
Yes, yes.
And what is the subject of the lecture?
Oh, my subject is, I wanted to give you the, if you ask Professor Rubin, you can take the text.
I can take what?
My text.
Mr. Rubin, please.
I think before my lecture you can get it.
They deliver to every listener because they can't understand through my speech.
Oh, so there is a text?
I read the text.
I see.
Does Marion have a copy of the text?
No, I have it in my baggage, so I wanted to give that.
Okay.
Do you have an extra copy with you?
In my luggage.
If you have one, I'd love to take one.
It might help me in this.
Yes, but yes, if you cannot take that.
Professor?
Yeah, Rubin.
But when do you come to my lecture?
I can't.
I have my daughter with me.
Oh, yes.
Then I think if you make telephone call to Rubin, you can easily.
D-U-B-I-N, Rubin?
Yeah, Rubin.
R-U-B-I-N.
And what department is he in?
The department literature.
OK, I'll find it.
Yes, yes.
I'm sure you can fax it to me or whatever.
Yes.
Great.
Okay, and you met with all these other Nobel laureates in Atlanta.
Yes.
And tell me, was that interesting for you, to find what these other people are thinking about?
Yes, Atlanta.
I think Nobel Prize, whether or not, can be alone.
And also writer can be connected, make a very deep contact with other novelists, such as I feel very deep relationship with Nadine Godima.
I interviewed her last 12 here, by the way.
I did an interview with her like me we're doing now.
She's wonderful.
then there's not the necessity to gather, to come together in Atlanta.
But so I was doubting about the meaning to come all together in Atlanta at first.
But as a newcomer of Nobel Prize laureate, I wanted to say hello to everything.
So I went there.
Then I found out many authors, very brilliant authors came.
And I found out almost every of them has the scar of 20th century, you know, the scar.
from the civilian war in Spain.
Claude Simon had a scar of Spain, Spanish war, a civilian war in Spain, and Octavio Paz had a scar as a Mexican intellectual he created.
He experienced many much of things
Also, our Shoinka scar from the African-Nigeria, and Shoinka, Derek Walcott, of the anti-right-hand, and Tony Molson as a colored intellectual in your country.
And I myself have the scar of the wartime and after the war.
That is water I have lived in for a long time.
And I was from the Russian.
So it really is a community, isn't it?
Yes, a community of the 20th century.
Every of the members had a very deep scar of this age.
Scars of the age?
Yes.
Then I found out, yes, this is a human being.
This is a human being of 20th century.
So I thought, yes, it is meaningful to speak very honestly about our being and our literature.
So I enjoyed it.
I don't know how to phrase this question, and maybe you can help me a little bit, but I'm really so profoundly moved at how the experience that you have had, you and your wife, with your son,
and how profoundly it changed your life.
Yes.
And has it made you a better person, a better writer, a more important writer, in your view, to have gone through this experience?
Would you have been a different writer, more politically involved?
I wonder, if we look at the road that goes right and the road that goes left, had this boy been born like all other children, you'd have been a different person entirely, wouldn't you?
And your writing would have been different.
But without the birth of my son, I believe I must have ended writing very early.
After this nip the bird, I think I hadn't any true theme of my literature.
You had not any true theme?
I hadn't.
So the son gave you the theme then, didn't he?
Yes, yes.
I hope to speak more warmly about myself, the birth of my son, and how I fought, how I struggled with my son and with my wife.
That gave me the new theme.
Then I began writing as a completely new writer.
So now I am.
Do you think that your work should be seen as a body of work?
Are these all parts of a corpus, so to speak, as an oeuvre?
And to understand what you've done, we must see the whole thing.
Yes.
Accurately so.
Accurately, this is, I think, my work is a kind of opera, oeuvre complete, oeuvre, oeuvre shorty, oeuvre complete, in total.
I am very happy to get this prize because they began translating my work again here.
So I think if they translate my trilogy, my newest and the last trilogy, this flaming green tree, then they can find out.
the totality that began with this Nipusa bud and its end by framing green tree and that is strongly supported by the birth of my son and my life in the general situation of Japanese life.
I don't know if this question is relevant or not, and if it's not, we don't have to answer it, but I wonder what you feel when, you know, you lived through a terrible war and a nuclear attack in the country.
Yes, yes.
And then today, in the last couple of months, we see in your country Japanese people attacking Japanese people with gas.
In our country, we have Americans blowing up Americans in Oklahoma City.
It's very depressing, isn't it?
What does this tell us about where we're going with human nature and any sense of human dignity?
We're destroying our own people.
If I speak about Japan, we Japanese are now today regarded as a strong people.
They create many products and they sell it to the overseas and they have many strong yen and they are prosperous in the meaning of
economics.
But I always, I have been felt that Japan and Japanese is very, very vulnerable.
Vulnerable country and vulnerable people.
So now it is the time that our vulnerability comes on the surface of our life.
Then some people
who are completely against, hostile to Japan society, they create the poisonous gas, and they attack us.
So that is, very simply speaking, now Japan's vulnerability becomes very clear.
That is the first point.
And about your Oklahoma bombing, I don't know the true meaning, but I feel very strong
Relationship.
It's almost a civil war, in a sense.
Yes, yes, yes, civil war.
And that's what's so, that we kill each other in our own way.
Oh, yes, yes.
Listen, I'm running out of time, and I know you, no, no, not for me, I'm thinking about you.
Yes.
But I wonder, would you inscribe this for me?
Yes, with a big pleasure, yes.
This is my name here.
Show it to me, yeah.
Thank you.
This has been a question.
One more question.
A recurring theme in your work is Eden, lost Eden, the loss of Eden, of the Garden of Eden, the loss of innocence, I guess, is a theme of yours.
And that is a theme that has been apparent throughout your work, I guess.
Is that something that has been always something that you've considered in writing?
Yes.
But then you've also been quoted as saying that how Hikari, is that how you pronounce his name, your son?
Yes, Hikari.
How he saved your life.
Is that a fair quote?
I guess I read someplace where you said he actually in a way saved your life.
Yes, Hikari saved me and Hikari gave me the chance of recovery from
very, very deep recovery, my recovery, personal recovery, and also social recovery, the image of social recovery of Japan.
He gave me that hint of reconciliation, reconciliation with my son, and also reconciliation among my family, and reconciliation among our
society and our reconciliation with china and with korea and those uh recovery and reconciliation and redemption if i yeah if i use a lot of christianity i and she gave me the hint for the for the redemption but i and i'm writing about this for a long time but now
I hope not through the Nobel, but more directly, I hope to express my image of reconciliation or recovery or redemption to Japanese colleagues.
That is my motivation to change my life.
to study and to write a new thing.
I'm glad I asked the last question.
You know, I am a very funny Japanese who hasn't any camera and who has any automobiles, any motor cars.
You have no motor car either?
Either.
I haven't.
Why?
But in my village, my mother always saying, you must not buy
because you haven't any place to go.
How about the camera?
You must not buy your camera because you know everyone in my village.
That's funny.